Let's discuss the theme, imitate Jesus and showing favor to lowly ones.
Now, open up to Proverbs, please, chapter 19, and here's a beautiful
proverb in harmony with this theme. Proverbs 1917, it says,
the one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah, and he, Jehovah,
will repay him for what he does. Well, that's a beautiful thought, isn't it?
We're going to lend to Jehovah. The Hebrew word for lowly literally means
thin, lean slender. So it's someone who is weak due to maybe some depressing
circumstance, poverty, illness. The English word lowly means bent low, and there's a
heavy weight on their back. They need help, they are lowly, and if you think
about it, all of us are lowly at times, aren't we? There are times there's a heavy weight on our back,
and we're bent low. And of course, we know that Jesus set the perfect example,
in showing favor to lowly ones. But now here's a question, what qualities
enable him to do so? Well, let's discuss three, and those same three qualities
will put us in position to show this favor to lowly ones and lend to Jehovah.
Number one, compassion. Now, compassion is defined in the insight book as a
sympathetic awareness of another suffering coupled with a desire to
alleviate that suffering. So in other words, we're keenly aware of someone
suffering, and we want to do something about it to alleviate it. Open up to Mark,
chapter six, please. Now, here's a beautiful example of Jesus showing compassion.
Mark six, and please, let's read verse 34. It says, well, on getting out of the
boat, he saw a large crowd, and he was moved with pity for them, because they
were as sheep without a shepherd, and he started to teach them many things.
Now, let's think about the circumstances. Jesus was very tired. He really
needed some quiet time, some downtime. I didn't even have time to eat a meal in peace.
So he gets in a boat. He goes to an isolated area, but a crowd of thousands of
people found out where he was going. They got there ahead of him. Now, when Jesus
got out of the boat, how could he have reacted? He could have immediately
dismissed that crowd. Maybe he made an appointment with him. Now, come back tomorrow
or the same time tomorrow, and then I'll help you. Or he could have maybe
spent 10 or 15 minutes with them, taught them a few things, flipped them a few
spiritual tidbits, we could say, and then sent them on their way. But no,
pity, compassion moved him to teach them many things, and apparently several
hours was involved, because the account says that while he was teaching them the
hour grew late. In fact, he even fed them physically before he sent them on their
way. But what was it that moved him to do this? Compassion. So similarly, compassion
will move us to extend favor to the lowly. If we don't have this right feeling
toward them, we might not even notice the suffering they're experiencing, and
we're certainly not going to be moved to do anything about it. But compassion
will move us to visit them, console them, excuse me, provide transportation,
give them a gift, whatever it takes to show favor to these lowly ones. But now let's
get our second quality, humility. Please go to Philippians chapter 2.
Philippians chapter 2, and here's a beautiful scripture talking about Jesus'
humility. Beginning at verse 5, it says, keep this mental attitude in you that
was also in Christ Jesus, who although he was existing in God's form, gave
no consideration to a seizure, namely that he should be equal to God. No, but he
emptied himself and took a slave's form and became human. More than that, when he
came as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to the point of death, yes,
death on a torture stake. Now first contemplate the humility it took for Jesus to
empty himself of his glorious heavenly body, his lofty heavenly home, his
privileges, his position. But then when he got here on the earth, think of the
humility as he dealt with a lowly disease, dying offspring of Adam. Now think about it,
he was the only perfect person on the planet. He could have become hypercritical,
comparing how perfect he was with how imperfect everybody else was. He could have
really put people down, but instead he slave for, ministered to, taught, washed
the feet of these lowly offspring of Adam, treating them in effect as though they were
superior to himself. Now to appreciate perhaps a little better this humility of
Jesus, and this really doesn't do the job, this illustration, but it may help.
Imagine that you are confined to a home or institution for mentally handicapped
individuals. Now you're not mentally handicapped, but you're confined to this
home, this institution where these ones are cared for. Now it would be very easy to
develop a superiority attitude toward the other residents, but can you imagine
slaving for them, serving them, ministering to them, washing their feet?
Now that would take humility with him, and perhaps that does illustrate a little
bit. The humility of this perfect man, uniquely perfect, dealing with a handicapped
offspring of Adam. Well, that same quality of humility will move us to perform humble
down to earth task in behalf of these ones that may be more disadvantaged than we
are at least right now. To show them this favor, these ones that are experiencing
poverty, weakness, they're bent low by some depressing circumstance.
Well, let's get one more quality, approachability. Now what do you think of when you
think of approachability? Well, the dictionary defines it this way possible
to approach accessible, easy to talk to or deal with, friendly. Open up to Mark
chapter 10, please, and here's a scripture that talks about this approachability
of Jesus. He attracted people of all different backgrounds to him.
Mark chapter 10, and just looking at some of these verses, look at verse 1,
crowds gathered to him. Verse 2, the Pharisees felt free to approach.
Look at verse 10, the disciples approached and began to question him.
Verse 13, people brought their young children. Verse 17, a man ran up and fell
at Jesus. Well, here you have in those five verses, crowds, the Pharisees,
Jesus disciples, parents with their little children, just a stranger, a man.
Jesus certainly was approachable to people. See, it was obvious that his accessibility,
but also undoubtedly his countenance, his friendly, facial expressions.
See, made him appear not too busy for people, but they felt free to approach him.
Well, similarly, we should do our best to develop this godly quality.
Now it's true we're limited and we're imperfect, but we should do our best to try
to appear accessible. See, not always too busy for others.
We should strive to maintain warm, joyful, friendly facial expressions so that
we appear accessible to people. And then as they approach, we can show them
favor and we can lend to Jehovah. Well, there we have three qualities that will help us.
Did you get them? We talked about compassion, humility, and approachability.
And how are we going to benefit if we show this favor to lowly ones?
Well, Psalm 41.1 says, Happy is anyone who shows consideration to the lowly.
So Jehovah says you're going to be happy. And then it goes on to say, Jehovah will rescue him
in the day of calamity. And that applies to calamities now, the big calamity,
the great tribulation. And then remember that scripture we read at the beginning,
Proverbs 1917, when we show favor to the lowly, we're lending to Jehovah.
And if we do that, we give to these lowly ones with not expecting anything in return.
Jehovah views it as a loan made to him. And he's going to repay that loan with favor and blessings.